chore(docs): add vision (#167)
aws-samples/sample-autonomous-cloud-coding-agents: docs/design/VISION.md

# Vision

This document states the long-term direction of **ABCA (Autonomous Background Coding Agents on AWS)** and the **tenets** that should guide design, implementation, and review. Use it when evaluating pull requests, RFCs, and ADRs: if a change clearly advances the vision and respects the tenets, it belongs; if it trades tenets away without an explicit, documented rationale, it needs more discussion.

- **Use this doc for:** alignment checks in review — “does this fit where we are going?”
- **Not a substitute for:** [ARCHITECTURE.md](./ARCHITECTURE.md) (system shape), [ROADMAP.md](../guides/ROADMAP.md) (what ships when), or [docs/decisions/](../decisions/) (specific accepted choices).

## Vision

ABCA is a **reference sample** of a self-hosted **software dark factory** on AWS: a platform that accepts high-level engineering intent, runs autonomous coding work in isolated cloud environments, and returns **reviewable outcomes** (pull requests, review comments, validation evidence) under human governance — not a chat session that happens to edit files.

> We are building toward **lights-sparse**, **graduated** autonomy: the default experience is **fire-and-forget** (submit, walk away, review the outcome), while the platform can **escalate to humans** when policy or risk requires it — without turning every task into a live pair-programming session. Customers should be able to **start conservative and loosen over time** (per repo, per policy, per task) as trust in outcomes grows. The platform’s job is to surround the agent with a **durable control plane** — admission, orchestration, memory, policy, HITL gates, cost limits, and observability — so that background agents are **reliable, bounded, and improvable** at organizational scale.

Reviewer: The `lights-sparse` isn't well defined while self-evolving is more descriptive, additionally "agentic-first" defines this vision adequately

```suggestion
We are building toward **self-evolving**, **agentic-first** autonomy: the default experience is **fire-and-forget** (submit, walk away, review the outcome), while the platform can **escalate to humans** when policy or risk requires it — without turning every task into a live pair-programming session. Customers should be able to **start conservative and loosen over time** (per repo, per policy, per task) as trust in outcomes grows. The platform’s job is to surround the agent with a **durable control plane** — admission, orchestration, memory, policy, HITL gates, cost limits, and observability — so that background agents are **reliable, bounded, and improvable** at organizational scale.
```

Reviewer: or `gradual` instead of `graduated`

> Success looks like teams that can **submit work and walk away**, trust that doomed work fails fast and cheaply, inspect every important decision in an audit trail, and see **measurable improvement** over time (fewer revision cycles, higher first-review merge rates, predictable cost).

Reviewer: "Insufficient" as the opposite of "sufficient" that satisfies the scope.

```suggestion
Success looks like teams that can **submit work and walk away**, trust that insufficient work fails fast and cheaply, inspect every important decision in an audit trail, and see **measurable improvement** over time (fewer revision cycles, higher first-review merge rates, predictable cost).
```

## Tenets

> Tenets are durable preferences. They can conflict; resolving conflict is a design choice that should be written down (ADR or RFC), not smuggled through in code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tenets are durable preferences. They can conflict; resolving conflict is a design choice that should be written down (ADR or RFC), not only embedded in code.
```

### 1. Fire-and-forget default; escalate when required

> **The normal path is asynchronous and unattended** — submit a task, leave, and come back to a PR, review, or failure reason. Human involvement during a run is **exceptional and policy-driven**, not the default way to “drive” the agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**The normal path is asynchronous and unattended** — submit a task, leave, and come back to a PR, review, or failure reason. Human involvement during a run is **by exception and policy-driven**, not the default way to “drive” the agent.
```

- Progress and outcomes surface through **status, events, and notifications** (GitHub comment, Slack, email) — the platform reaches the human; the human does not babysit a terminal.
- **Human-in-the-loop (HITL)** is how we escalate when autonomy must pause: Cedar **soft-deny** rules become approval gates; **hard-deny** rules still fail closed; **`--pre-approve`** scopes let trusted work proceed without repeated gates. See [CEDAR_HITL_GATES.md](./CEDAR_HITL_GATES.md) and [INTERACTIVE_AGENTS.md](./INTERACTIVE_AGENTS.md).
- Real-time steering (**nudge**, **watch**) is for **operator intervention**, not the primary product shape.
- **In review:** Do not conflate “background agent” with “no human ever.” Ask whether the change preserves fire-and-forget for the submitter while making escalation **reachable, attributable, and policy-gated** when risk warrants it.

### 2. Graduated autonomy — customers evolve with the platform

> **The same deployment should support different autonomy postures** so teams can adopt incrementally: tight gates early, broader pre-approval and fewer interrupts later — without forking the platform.

Reviewer: Simplification:

```suggestion
**The same deployment should support different levels of autonomy** so teams can adopt features incrementally: we recommend tight approval gates early, and broader pre-approvals and fewer interrupts later — without forking the platform to acommodate the level of autonomy.
```

- **Merge and release authority** stay human regardless of autonomy level; raising autonomy means fewer *in-run* interruptions, not unsupervised production promotion.
- **In review:** Prefer knobs that let operators tighten or loosen autonomy per repo/task; flag designs that lock everyone to one posture or that bypass policy to “make demos easier.”

### 3. Platform owns the control plane; agent owns reasoning

**Deterministic, cheap platform steps and expensive, flexible agent steps stay separated.**

- The orchestrator enforces invariants: admission, hydration, pre-flight, polling, finalization, concurrency, and terminal status — even when the agent crashes or misbehaves.
- The agent does not bypass platform policy (tokens, tool allowlists, budgets, Cedar gates).
- **In review:** Push non-LLM bookkeeping out of the agent runtime; push LLM-only work out of hot-path Lambdas unless there is a strong, documented reason.

> ### 4. Fail closed on risk; fail open only where safety allows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 4. Close risky failures; leave failures open only where safety allows
```
